Weighted gene co-expression network analysis unveils gene networks associated with the Fusarium head blight resistance in tetraploid wheat.Fusarium head blight (FHB) resistance in the durum wheat breeding gene pool is rarely reported. Triticum turgidum ssp. carthlicum line Blackbird is a tetraploid relative of durum wheat that offers partial FHB resistance. Resistance QTL were identified for the durum wheat cv. Strongfield × Blackbird population on chromosomes 1A, 2A, 2B, 3A, 6A, 6B and 7B in a previous study. The objective of this study was to identify the defense mechanisms underlying the resistance of Blackbird and report candidate regulator defense genes and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers within these genes for high-resolution mapping of resistance QTL reported for the durum wheat cv. Strongfield/Blackbird population.Gene network analysis identified five networks significantly (P < 0.05) associated with the resistance to FHB spread (Type II FHB resistance) one of which showed significant correlation with both plant height and relative maturity traits. Two gene networks showed subtle differences between Fusarium graminearum-inoculated and mock-inoculated plants, supporting their involvement in constitutive defense. The candidate regulator genes have been implicated in various layers of plant defense including pathogen recognition (mainly Nucleotide-binding Leucine-rich Repeat proteins), signaling pathways including the abscisic acid and mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase, and downstream defense genes activation including transcription factors (mostly with dual roles in defense and development), and cell death regulator and cell wall reinforcement genes. The expression of five candidate genes measured by quantitative real-time PCR was correlated with that of RNA-seq, corroborating the technical and analytical accuracy of RNA-sequencing.Gene network analysis allowed identification of candidate regulator genes and genes associated with constitutive resistance, those that will not be detected using traditional differential expression analysis. This study also shed light on the association of developmental traits with FHB resistance and partially explained the co-localization of FHB resistance with plant height and maturity QTL reported in several previous studies. It also allowed the identification of candidate hub genes within the interval of three previously reported FHB resistance QTL for the Strongfield/Blackbird population and associated SNPs for future high resolution mapping studies.
