QTL mapping for grain yield and three yield components in a population derived from two high-yielding spring wheat cultivars.Four genomic regions on chromosomes 4A, 6A, 7B, and 7D were discovered, each with multiple tightly linked QTL (QTL clusters) associated with two to three yield components. The 7D QTL cluster was associated with grain yield, fertile spikelet number per spike, thousand kernel weight, and heading date. It was located in the flanking region of FT-D1, a homolog gene of Arabidopsis FLOWERING LOCUS T, a major gene that regulates wheat flowering. Genetic manipulation of yield components is an important approach to increase grain yield in wheat (Triticum aestivum). The present study used a mapping population comprised of 181 doubled haploid lines derived from two high-yielding spring wheat cultivars, UI Platinum and LCS Star. The two cultivars and the derived population were assessed for six traits in eight field trials primarily in Idaho in the USA. The six traits were grain yield, fertile spikelet number per spike, productive tiller number per unit area, thousand kernel weight, heading date, and plant height. Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) analysis of the six traits was conducted using 14,236 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers generated from the wheat 90 K SNP and the exome and promoter capture arrays. Of the 19 QTL detected, 14 were clustered in four chromosomal regions on 4A, 6A, 7B and 7D. Each of the four QTL clusters was associated with multiple yield component traits, and these traits were often negatively correlated with one another. As a result, additional QTL dissection studies are needed to optimize trade-offs among yield component traits for specific production environments. Kompetitive allele-specific PCR markers for the four QTL clusters were developed and assessed in an elite spring wheat panel of 170 lines, and eight of the 14 QTL were validated. The two parents contain complementary alleles for the four QTL clusters, suggesting the possibility of improving grain yield via genetic recombination of yield component loci.
